Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I am so excited to introduce our featured leader today, Matt
Maloney. He's the Director of Applied AI and Data Science at City of Hope. Matt, it's so
nice to have you today. How are you doing?
Doing well. Glad to be here today.
Wonderful. It would be great if you could introduce yourself and tell us a little bit
about what you do and something you like to do for fun.
Sure. So what do I do? I'm a Director, as Libby said, of Data Science at City of Hope.
City of Hope is a large cancer treatment and research organization and has been recognized
as one of the nation's top hospitals for cancer care. We have hospitals in a few locations.
So Los Angeles, Orange County, Phoenix, Atlanta, and Chicago. And I've been working as a data
scientist and now in a leadership position there for about five years. My team specifically
focuses on building data solutions that are more operations focused as opposed to research
focused. There's a separate group we do work closely with that supports research. But I'd
be focused on things like, for example, helping with predicting claim denials or helping manage
something for philanthropy and help them find a solution. So that's a little bit about what
I do professionally. Like I said, I've been in health care now for about five years at
City of Hope and before that University of Utah Health System, but have a background in finance
and econ before that. Something I do for fun. I live in Fort Collins, Colorado with my wife and
two small children. And whenever I can, I like to get outside. So climbing, hiking, mountain biking,
snowboarding, you know, I really find that stuff helps me recharge. And I love being just outside
whenever I can be. It's a beautiful day here with a lot of snow on the ground, actually.
I was just gonna ask, did you get snow? Because my friends in Illinois and Wisconsin certainly did.
Yeah, we got, I don't know, maybe six inches yesterday and it's stuck around because it's
been cold. Yeah, well, you live in a great place to get outside. Fort Collins is fun and it's a
college town, so it's nice and nice and energetic. Well, I already saw somebody ask in the chat a
little bit more about City of Hope would be great. So if you could talk a little bit more about what
City of Hope does and what the data science function helps with the kind of problems that
you solve, if you could go in a little bit more depth there, that might give us some context.
Sure, yeah. So the function of, well, starting with City of Hope, City of Hope is first and
foremost cancer research and treatment. So we're not doing any clinical care that is not related
to cancer. And then on the research side, cancer is the focus as well. And so what does that cover?
That covers fundamental research on the research side. It's all kinds of cancer care for every
type of patient and disease type. It's also clinical trials, right? Making sure that we're
matching patients with the right clinical trials and getting them enrolled in the best care
possible. And I think one of the core missions of the organization is not just providing world-class
cancer care, but it's making it as accessible as possible to as many people, right? So it's not
just getting the highest quality treatment, but also making it broadly accessible. So what is the
data science role at City of Hope? So data science is a kind of broad term that I know the role
varies by organization, even across healthcare organizations. You'll have different data science
teams doing different things. So we have a kind of centralized group of data scientists in kind of
this larger applied AI and data science department. And we're kind of split into two teams. The first
team is focused on research applications. So they tend to work very closely with the academic research
teams at City of Hope. And then, sorry, I was distracted by the chat for a second. And then my
team is really focused on development and solutions for our internal operational needs. So that could
be on the clinical side. You can think of something like, you know, we have a proprietary model for
predicting or assessing sepsis risk for patients who have received bone marrow transplants. So that
would be more like what we would call clinical operations. We're trying to support an operational
workflow with a product we developed and manage. And then more on the business side, you know, my
team is also supporting requests around, you know, revenue cycles. So this may be, can we have a model that
will help us optimize our billing? One of the earliest projects I work on and still support is a forecasting
system for our finance team. And, you know, trying to think of new applications and other areas. Another
example is, recently, we've been tasked with supporting our philanthropy team with doing more, using some LLM
technology to help better understand and match gifts with research projects. So those are like a few examples, I
think, that can kind of create a vision of what our team is doing. Now, you might be hearing in this that the team I'm
in is focused a lot on sort of production solutions that tend to come in the form of like, like software or, you
know, something we would put into production that would run either as sort of an endpoint for inference from a
model, or it might be something that we would set up as like a daily cron job to deliver productions to some people
in a workflow somewhere. Or in the case of the clinical models, you know, signal and alert in one of our EHR systems,
right, when, for example, a model has a flag that a patient is at risk for sepsis, for example. And my team is not as
focused on sort of more of like, reporting, or what, what might be, you know, thought of in some organizations as sort of
like, like analytics and, and data visualization, we do some of that, but not as much, you know, especially recently, it's
been more focused on taking a predictive model or, you know, an LLM solution and putting it into production. I hope that
helps a little bit.
I just wanted to say something about the EHR. And I think that's electronic health record. But I remember our team saying
something about how you are integrating POSIT with EPIC, your EHR. And I thought that would be so cool to be able to share with
other healthcare people on the call as well. Would you be able to tell us a little bit more about how you're doing that?
And what EPIC is?
Yeah, it's an EHR, electronic health record, right? Did I get that right? Okay.
Yes. So EPIC is, I'm sure many of you may be familiar with it, but it's the largest organization, or largest vendor for
electronic medical record software, right? So when you go to visit your physician or whatever, and you see them working on
their computer, there's a good chance that that's the EPIC system they're working in, right? So a lot of the data my team
works with is data that originates in the EPIC system. You know, that's where information about patient gets put in. And
that's also, importantly, where a lot of the workflows are not just for providers, you know, care providers, physicians,
nurses, etc. But also, more and more some of our operational staff, because EPIC doesn't just handle, you know, the medical
record side of things for us, but also handles a lot of the billing related work and processes. So we also have what we call our
revenue cycle staff working in that environment and with that information. And so one of the requests that was coming up is to, you
know, we would have standalone applications, a lot of them would be living in our PositConnect instance. And so, you know, for
example, this is a good, good motivating example, we have a tool that helps our coding team. So this is the team that, you know, a
visit happens, and then, you know, basically, it's recorded what treatments and procedures and diagnoses the patients have. And then
that moves to then into not only the billing process, but also, you know, just to make sure that we have a rigorous and compliant medical
record for the patient. So there's a team that reviews this documentation. And we have a tool that assists them with that documentation. And it
was living in PositConnect. And, you know, one of their requests is we do all our workflows in EPIC, this would be a lot lower friction for us if we
could embed it. And EPIC does have a capability of integrating software in a few different ways, right? If you're a, you know, a software vendor
that's trying to say develop something that you would want to be available in the marketplace, right, as like a really premier like software
solution for other healthcare systems, you would use like a spar on fire framework, you would register as an app developer. But for a lot of our cases,
we were hoping there might be a sort of a kind of middle ground to becoming full blown software engineers. And so we've been working with the POSIT team on
nesting our applications in EPIC. And, you know, passing a few parameters using what they call, you know, setting it up as an, they call it an FDI record, if anyone
cares, I don't actually even know what that acronym means. Maybe somebody else here knows. But you set up this record in their system of where you want this
application to live. And then we've been working on some of the details of making sure that the integration goes smoothly. And we're still, you know, we still haven't
completed that process, but we're getting pretty close. And it's very promising, because for us, it's a really rapid way to take something we've developed as data
scientists, and move it into their preferred environment for their workflows, without necessarily having to engage with our software engineering team, or, you know, get
outside of the scope of where we really feel comfortable. So yeah, yeah, that's, that's what we've been doing, as far as integrating POSIT applications hosted on POSIT Connect
with our EHR electronic health record system.
That is awesome. So what I'm hearing is, and we're gonna hop to the slide of questions in just one second, what I'm hearing is you have end users who are medical coders, who are
getting to stay in their system, but the information is getting to pass to the applications that your data science team is building, so that they don't have to, like, use a shiny app, if they're not familiar
with it, they can use the applications that they're used to using.
Yeah, so well, they the, you know, the shiny app is is nested there, but they don't have to, for example, open a separate window, or, you know, type in whatever, you know, arguments are
needed, manually, right, some of that information can be passed, which, you know, it's not, for some workflows, it's more critical than others, you know, that the coding staff that works with us are very,
they're very, they're really, really good, great partners. And so this is sort of a nice to have for them. But but in some of our other projects, where our customers are providers, where their,
their workflows and, and time is very, very valuable.
And providers being like doctors and clinicians.
Yeah, yeah, yes, maybe a little bit of jargon. Yeah, we're talking about physicians, you know, physician, physician assistants, nurse practitioners. And the goal here is to
eventually take some of the work we're doing, that's more oriented towards providers. And we've already integrated some of our provider facing work through a different EHR integration method, which is like they call it best practice advisory alerts. So we do have other ways of integrating some of our, our work into the EHR system. But this would be another option for us if we can, you know, get it to where we want it to be for for provider workflows. Yeah.
Yeah, I'd love to hear in the chat from everybody, if there are things that you could think of that would be cool to integrate into the applications that you build as a data scientist or a data analyst or a data person in general. Because that's something that I've never even thought of before until I met Matt, and he said that they were integrating it. I'm like, I didn't think that you could do that. So I'm curious if there are any other use cases that you can think of. I'll be interested to go back to the chat later and look at them.
But we have so many questions in Slido. Let's get to Slido questions. We might hop around in topics, but I would love to start with Noor's question because your your job title has AI on it. And we're in an AI era and Noor has an AI question. Would you like to unmute and ask that one, Noor?
Sure. Hello, I apologize for my camera being off. Hi, Matt. Nice to meet you. So, just for warning, I am more on the, I think they call bearish side of AI, also known as fancy ML, but with the aggressive push to adopt what people call AI into their workflows, how do you handle the needs of privacy, like PHA, PHI, PII, and so forth?
I know you're more on the, I think you mentioned administrative side as opposed to research side, but there's still like privacy concerns and billing and so forth. How exactly are you handling that? Or how are you handling that? Are you just like, no, that's, we're not dealing with AI right now because we have a nice steady workflow and so forth?
Sure, that's a great question. So, we've done, there are a couple of things that are really important. The first is we have set up at CityHope a really strong AI governance framework and committee so that every use of AI goes through a rigorous review process.
Where a lot of different concerns from privacy, HIPAA compliance to various ethics considerations are reviewed. The second thing is we've worked really closely with Microsoft to make sure that we're using, we're almost exclusively using OpenAI at this point because of their partnership with Microsoft and because of our existing partnership with Microsoft.
So that they've been able to ensure that none of our information that's being passed to any endpoints from an outside provider are, any of that data can be misused or is not compliant with our regulatory requirements.
Very, very cool. Thank you, Noor, for the great question. I have another question here from Arsenis that would be great to ask. Arsenis, are you available to ask that one live?
Yes, I am. Thanks, Olivia. There he is. Hey, Arsenis. I didn't see your camera on, so I wasn't sure. Oh, it is on. You're on. It's on now. Okay, cool.
So, hey, Matt, thank you so much for chatting with us today. My question is a little bit about your role, and you kind of described AI at City of Hope, or not AI, but data science at City of Hope.
You all seem to have a pretty broad scope in terms of the types of things you all do, from accounting and finance to research to clinical things. And so I'm wondering, how is it that you manage to kind of try to stay abreast of the technical elements of all of those different things, because they are quite different?
How do you handle all that in discussions with your various teams?
Yeah, that's a great question. I think that's one of the most, if not the most challenging thing about the job right now, because it seems like the scope of our role is growing very quickly, right?
And we're at larger organizations, I think that a lot of specialization has already happened, right? You have your data scientist, you have your AI engineer, you have your ML Ops person, right?
And so one of the biggest challenges for me as a leader at this sort of midsize organization is making sure that we're able to not get overwhelmed as the scope of what might be under the data science umbrella or the scope of our department grows, right?
Because it used to be, you know, know some stats and a little bit of ML, and then it grew. And now you've got to know DevOps. And now you've got to know LLM frameworks. And the answer is, you know, the answer is, I don't really have an answer, because this is one of the most challenging things about my job.
So I'll talk to a couple of things we're doing to try to address this. One is, we are moving towards a little greater specialization. Well, we're, you know, moving, we haven't done a round of hiring in a few years, but we're moving into one right now where we're going to be identifying more specialized ML engineering and AI engineering roles.
So I can have, you know, a data scientist on my team who's, you know, very, has a lot of expertise in a narrow, not a narrow, but it has expertise in a certain area of our data resources, maybe has a really strong science background or statistics background, but doesn't have an AI engineering background. Now we can have somebody to complement this person's skill set, rather than when I get an intake request, I got to just, you know, use who I have. So that's one thing we're doing.
The second thing we're doing is, we're taking on a little bit more of a mature product management framework, so that we can make sure whenever possible, we are able to partner with other teams for data engineering, in some cases, UI, UX development, and DevOps.
So we're not getting bogged down in something like, you know, deploying our cloud infrastructure or something like that for a project where it's not an efficient use of our team's time. So those are really the two things as we are moving towards greater role specialization.
Also, I should say carving out time for learning, you know, everyone on my team, great lifelong learners, extremely capable learners, almost all of them have PhDs, but I got to give them the time, right, to take the course or study to bring up their skills that, because the skills and tools are constantly changing.
So that's one thing is specialization of roles, kind of this upskilling idea. And then the second thing is taking a lot more seriously, finding partners and making sure we have good partners in the organization, and we're delegating where we can, right?
Like if somebody on the team wants to do a little bit of data engineering, but we have a data engineer available to us, I'm not as likely to kind of just permit that as I would have been, you know, in the past. So hopefully that kind of answers your question.
I think it does. And there's an honest question that is a little bit of a follow up on this. And it's at what point do you hand off your work to the software engineering team? I think you touched on that a little bit. There's a lot of AI slash data science folks can do, especially with things like PositConnect. But at some point, those tools get handed off to the production teams, right?
Well, yes. And, you know, I think, when do we hand it off? This is a good question. This is another thing that's still something I'm figuring out. You know, I can sit here and say I figured it all out.
Some data science teams don't hand it off at all. They're like, yeah, we don't give it to IT or anybody. We handle it. But a lot of them do.
We are in IT. So the answer to that, I think, is usually, yeah, that's another thing that's a little different about our organization. Yeah, we sit in IT, which is, I don't actually know what might be the norm across the industry, you know, to be in IT versus outside of IT for these roles. I think it varies, but we're within IT.
And I think really where we are right now is sort of we hand it off when, like, a product manager or the customer says that whatever we deploy in PositConnect, for example, is not good enough.
So I draw the boundary on, like, you know, for a lot of the things we're doing, what we're able to deploy in, say, PositConnect is sufficient or delivering a report, you know, on a cron schedule is sufficient.
But really, the answer to that is guided by either our customers in the organization or the product team when they're like, look, we need a better UI UX. We need better performance as far as latency.
Something like that is where we would be like, OK, we're going to pass this. We're going to pass this on to the software engineering team. And sometimes it's sort of a collaborative hybrid approach.
Like, you know, we have a project now where we've got some sort of like services deployed as fast APIs on PositConnect, and we were operating the UI UX and the customers were kind of like, you know, we kind of want a little better UI than I think what you can offer.
And instead of like doubling down and letting my team work on that more, I said, you know what, this is time to hand it off. So they're going to start working on building the UI and they may end up migrating those APIs as well. I'm not sure, but kind of just depends on when we decide we've met the customer's needs.
All right, cool. Well, we're getting lots and lots and lots of feedback in the chat about being inside or outside of IT. And I wanted to call out Eric Nance's hot take here, which is if you follow best practices with software engineering and their data science teams, you may not need to hand things off.
It's a common misconception to this day that something can be prototyped in Shiny or general artifacts on PositConnect, but they absolutely can stand the test of scaling and optimal UX.
Hear, hear. I think that that's great. I don't always have the bandwidth in my brain to become a pseudo software engineer and develop all those software engineering best practices with all of the like other stuff, stats and ML and stuff that I already have in my brain.
But if you can do it, or just work really closely with them to understand what they need as best practices, it can be great.
All right. Fantastic questions from everybody, including our anonymous asker. Thank you so much for asking that. Nicolay, I saw that you had a question and I wanted to call you in if you are still here to ask that live. Are you available? There you are. Hey, Nicolay.
I've highlighted it in Slido. Yes.
Yeah, sorry. I'm in a conference room with my team here. We're all very excited to see another fellow healthcare data scientist. So we all work at Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, also an EPIC.
Oh, awesome. Hi, team. Nice to meet you.
Yeah, no, this is it's very interesting how this is almost a mirror image of how we are in some ways. So I have a lot of technical questions around the integration, but I'm going to save that if we can maybe get some time offline.
Oh yeah, what can I do later?
A general question, I have those. I mean, there's a lot of generative AI. Matt, you said, you know, it seems like a lot of your work is split between advanced analytics and then some you mentioned sepsis prediction.
How much has development that involves LLMs and generative AI, like, taken hold in your space? And what are some examples of use cases and applications you guys have developed that use generative AI?
Yeah, great, great question. So, really, in the last two years, the percentage of our work that has focused on applications of generative AI has really grown, right? It's a huge percentage of what we do now.
And I think a lot of that is just driven by demand, but also, you know, finding the right the right opportunities. And I think to give you a few examples of where we've had success.
Specific applications, and some of these are managed by my team, some of these are managed more by the research team I was talking about, some are collaborations, but kind of I'll go through a few examples of where we found success. Clinical documentation, reviews and analysis is huge.
So sometimes those are to support coders, sometimes that's to support clinicians.
A big one we've worked on at City of Hope is a summarization of documentation for new patients that come in.
So being able to take all the documents we get from external sources, right? And in some cases, doing the OCR, converting them and then generating summaries for the providers.
This is one of our kind of branded as our Hope LLM products as new patient summarization.
So that's another example. Clinical trial matching and feasibility assessment has been a big one, right?
Where we're able to take, say, a document that outlines the inclusion and exclusion criteria for a clinical trial.
And sometimes those criteria are very complex and it's sitting in a text document.
And then being able to, in an automated way, apply to an individual patient or a patient population, are these inclusion and exclusion criteria met for a given patient, given all of the clinical documentation we have for them?
So those are a few examples. And something we're moving into a little bit now is, you know, maybe looking some at payer documentation.
So like payer contracts, things like that. That's something we haven't done a lot of yet, but we're looking towards doing in the next maybe three months or so.
So that's just kind of a high level of some of the applications, areas we're having success in.
I don't know if you have follow up questions, but I know it's kind of a lot because we're doing a lot of different things.
I do have one quick follow up around some of these, like a lot of these are things that vendors actually also provide.
So do you all use or does your team evaluate a lot of the things that Epic might be throwing your way for, for example, document summarization or their predictive models too?
Yes, yes. So that's a great question. And that's something that there's always this sort of difficult, you know, sort of build versus buy decision that is complicated by how quickly the landscape is changing. Right?
So a lot of the things we've built, you know, like some of the analysis of clinical documentation, when we started that work and rolled out our first version, it wasn't available from Epic yet. Right.
Some of the Epic generative AI solutions are just being rolled out now.
And so moving forward, we're going to apply the same governance framework we have had for predictive models in the past, which is we don't want to build something ourselves that Epic has already solved, for example.
So what we'll do is we, as part of the AI governance process I mentioned before, our first role is to sort of evaluate if that solution is sufficient for our needs, you know, so is Epic solution have adequate performance to meet our internal requirements for whatever this use case is. Right.
And so one of the roles of my team, especially those who are focused on the clinical side, is to do some validation work of those models.
So it would be, and we've done this before, for example, I mentioned the sepsis model.
Step one in that project was validate that whatever the Epic model was at the time, see if it meets our requirements.
If it doesn't, maybe we have a case for developing our own solution and we revisit in a few years if they release a new version.
And I think moving forward as vendors like Epic roll out more and more of their own solutions, I think that this validation work is going to become a lot bigger part of our job, you know, to be frank.
I think it's going to be because I don't think we're in a place where we're comfortable, even if it's coming from Epic, just rolling it out with some kind of internal validation.
So as they roll out more and more solutions, which is happening more rapidly, I think it's going to become a bigger part of our responsibility and a bigger part of our role is going to be doing the validation work.
And then, of course, developing where whatever they have is not necessarily meeting the requirements for our specific organization.
And, you know, an area where this has come up in the past is just that we have a very specialized patient population.
So sometimes our needs are a little different.
So, for example, I don't see us using a vendor solution for some of the work we're doing around clinical trials, for example, because we have a lot of proprietary data.
We have a specialized patient population.
But, you know, for stuff around saying like drafting denial response letters or something for billing, that's something where I think, you know, we could probably validate it really quickly and be like, yeah, the vendor solution is totally sufficient for our needs.
Awesome. This conversation has been so great, and there are so many questions in Slido about the nuts and bolts of integration stuff.
I know that you are working with Rachel on a sort of like spotlight, which might cover a little bit more of this so people can look forward to that.
If you are interested in follow-ups with Matt and you have fantastic questions about this integration stuff, feel free to like, you know, send Rachel a DM here and leave her your email.
We can connect to you and talk more about it.
But I would like to ask an example of like the nuts and bolts questions that we're getting, because one of them was like how, for example, does Epic pass an encounter number or a patient ID, something like that, to connect?
Like, what does that connection look like?
That is something that might better be answered by one of the engineers that we are working with on this.
You know, my day-to-day is less hands-on, and I'm concerned I may not give an accurate answer on that one.
That is okay. That is totally okay.
So I think that's something where I'd like to get one of the engineers we're working with in the conversation, especially with such a large group, because I think I have the answer, but I'm going to be cautious on this one.
No worries. I appreciate the nuance that is going on behind the scenes with all of that. It's way above my head.
Okay. Let's hop over to Slido and chat a little bit more. I myself am getting distracted by the chat today. It is wild. Y'all are just so amazing in the chat.
I saw a question Brent had asked.
Oh, perfect.
And I think, let's see. Brent, do you want to jump in here? I can ask you to unmute.
I just highlighted your question, Brent, so it popped to the top in Slido in case you don't remember.
No, I do, and thank you. I'm sorry. I missed the majority of the talk. I was busy in clinic.
Anyway, as an end user, we don't have Epic. We have Cerner.
However, I find it difficult to implement some of these machine learning models into a very good use case practice.
I mean, a sepsis model does work out, but there are some ways that nurses and the end users record data that's not super helpful.
And I apologize. There's construction going on.
You can't hear it. Don't worry.
Where it's not, like, for example, the blood pressure recording is two separate recordings, but they're not mutually exclusive pieces of data.
They actually go together and can provide important information.
And so how does your team handle these nuanced pieces of clinical information that might be overlooked by a machine learning model?
Because that's where I kind of struggle sometimes.
Yeah, that's a great question. Let me sit on that for a second.
I think that the short answer is, you know, we use a lot of different tools and we spend a lot of time on data engineering and cleaning up the data.
You were bringing up blood pressure information.
And I had one of our Ph.D. data scientists working for six months just cleaning up some of the data formatting, right?
Sometimes you get different units of measurement if you're talking about dosages and things like that.
And we still spend a ton of time with just old school getting in the data, cleaning it up, you know, working with data engineers.
Because, you know, I think at the essence of your question is a little bit of like garbage in, garbage out, right?
And I am very, one of the things I'm very, I don't know, adamant about is we have a whole kind of suite of tools we work with.
And almost all of the solutions we build, it's not just, you know, a generative AI model, you know, just throw it on top of your data.
It's basically a combination of a lot of different efforts and tools.
And a lot of the time that's, you know, doing a lot of work on cleaning up the data.
And not only just cleaning it up, but we work with a couple of physicians who give us feedback along the way.
So one thing that I think is often overlooked is how much of a time commitment is required from some kind of subject matter expert like a physician or a clinical documentation specialist to help us through that process of cleaning up the data because we don't have the clinical expertise.
So one of the things I try to do early on in a project is say, okay, you all need a solution for your workflow.
Or this is going to look like a partnership where we're going to have to work together and we're going to need some of your time to validate, say, hey, have we cleaned up the lab's data in a way that it's consistent with your understanding of what's clinically relevant, right?
And then, you know, sometimes that's a much bigger part of the project than writing the code to make the predictions on top of those data sources.
So, you know, I don't know if I fully answered your question, but I think that we take very, very seriously that whether we're talking about, you know, a traditional predictive model or a generative AI solution, this is one, you know, tool that's usually only a limited part of a complete solution.
And one of the things is making sure that the data that goes in is of high quality.
And unfortunately, that's still, there's no magic for that.
That's still a time consuming process that requires time from us and requires time from the subject matter experts.
And that's just the way it is.
I think that, you know, we could sit and say that AI is going to solve that problem.
But no, there's still a ton of work to be done.
That's my experience as well in working with clinical data for different projects.
Do the administrators appreciate the time that it takes?
Like, the people who run the hospital or the facility at City of Hope include that into their budgetary aspects?
Because there's another constraint that we run against, which is the healthcare administrator role and whether or not they recognize that as value added.
Yeah, that's another one I don't have an answer to because I think it's a universal challenge in healthcare.
And the only thing, I mean, how I'll speak to that is just we've gotten more mature, as I said, with at the beginning saying this is what's going to be required.
And then if administrators can't design some way that, for example, the incentives, you know, because I mean, let me see if this aligns with what you're saying, which is basically we have a situation where the organization wants an improvement and say how the physicians are documenting.
Something like this, right? But that's going to require physicians to take time to work with us to validate, you know, the results potentially help with some of the helping us to understand the data.
But then they're not given the time or any incentive structure to actually carve out that time. Is that kind of consistent with the problem you're talking about?
OK, OK, so, yeah, so I love this, thinking about this stuff, because my background is economics.
That's what I did for grad school, kind of trained as an economist.
So I'm always thinking about are the incentives of the people who are needing to be helping us or using these tools aligned with the broader incentives of the organization?
And if not, how do we align those incentives? And I am now being very assertive about having that conversation early.
So this isn't about clinicians, but a recent example is I found out that some of the clinical documentation specialists who are supposed to be our SMEs for validating some of the work we were doing.
They said, you know, we have this system that tracks our time and we don't have any code to log our time for this validation work.
And so I immediately was like, well, that's a problem we have to solve before we do any more development work here, because that's an instance where the overall organization wants this problem solved.
You have users that are saying they can't log their time against this. We've got to resolve that problem before we can do any more development work, because otherwise the incentives are all not aligned.
Oh, this is a fantastic conversation.
I just wanted to add, it's it sounds like there's a group of people here where it would be really awesome to have us all in a small group conversation.
And I was brainstorming about, like, do I spin up a form real quick, but that wasn't going to happen.
So if you all want to just, like, email me and say if you are interested, Rachel at Posit.co in being part of that, maybe we could help set something up for, like, early January or even in two weeks from now, depending on people's schedules to get together.
So right now, just put the email in there, if that's the best way.
Awesome. I think that sounds great.
I hate to, like, shift us away from this. We have about 10 minutes left.
So I would love to at least hop in and ask a little bit of a career focused question.
We had an anonymous question as well. And so I'm going to put these two kind of together because the anonymous question I think can be answered pretty quickly.
It's did I hear correctly that City of Hope has an academic division? And if so, what happens in that academic division?
Could you share just a quick bit about that? And then we'll talk a little bit about career stuff.
Sure. Let me.
So the academic research that's happening at City of Hope, a lot of that happens with, I mean, there are a lot of providers who are dual researchers and also providing clinical care.
But then a lot of the research projects at City of Hope are happening within the Beckman Research Institute.
So there's a standalone research institute focused on just academic research.
And I do not work very closely with the Beckman Research Institute.
Within my department, again, there are sort of two groups.
There's my group that's very focused on clinical and business operations and building solutions for those types of problems.
And then there is a research group that sits next to us that partners.
It's sort of like us and IT partnering with the Beckman Research Institute.
And I just thought maybe it was a good idea to have the director for that group, Alec Wong.
Maybe he could come into one of these meetups.
Maybe I should recommend him as a guest because he has a lot of fascinating things to talk about on the use of generative AI and machine learning on the research side.
We're talking about fundamental research around cancer.
But I'm not really the expert in that area.
Awesome. Okay.
Well, we'd like to ask everybody if they have a piece of career advice that they have really loved or has been really impactful for them.
I don't know if there's something that you have on the top of your head or that you think about.
I can't remember if I warned you in our pre-call.
Hey, I'm going to ask you a career advice question.
But, yeah, I'd love to hear.
Let's see.
I don't remember.
I don't remember prepping for this, but I think I think my maybe it happened and I just forgot.
But that's OK. So career advice.
I think there's a lot of value in sort of finding an industry that you're interested in getting a foot in the door, even if it's not in the ideal role.
Because, you know, as a data scientist, I think.
One thing that becomes really, really valuable is knowledge of a specific industry or domain knowledge of a specific industry or even domain knowledge around specifically the data that your organization has.
And so there's a lot of room once you become like an expert or get your foot in the door in an organization for then defining your role within an organization.
At least that's been my experience.
I mean, I don't want to say this applies generally across the board because maybe some organizations have more have more rigorous role definitions than than ours does or has.
But, you know, I've seen people come in and they find a problem they're interested in really excel in it.
And then all of a sudden, especially because it's a growing area, they've carved out like an entirely different like job definition and career path for themselves.
And that hasn't just been in my experience at City of Hope, but it's also been I remember my first job out of out of undergrad.
This is going going way back.
This is in 2010 job market was still a little bit weak.
And I got a job that was like at a small financial firm where I thought I was going to be doing a lot of administrative work.
And I like in the first couple of months, you know, they said they had some problems with their spreadsheets or whatever.
I learned VBA and, you know, all of a sudden I had a totally different job.
And so I think, you know, again, this is me improvising a little bit because I didn't have time to sit and think very long about.
No, no, that's OK. It's an off the cuff quick question.
No worries.
But I think that's something that that, you know, I don't exactly want to call it a backdoor, but it's it's organizations.
I found the roles aren't as rigorously defined as they might look like from the outside when you see a job posting.
And so if you get in the door and you have something you're really passionate about, I think there's often a lot of flexibility to shape your role.
Fantastic. And I think I would agree still in a lot of industries.
Not everything is the same, you're right.
But, yeah, a lot still.
Well, I wanted to hop over to see if we can just get one more question in.
Frank asked a question.
Frank, if you're available to ask that live, if you're still here, I know some people have to drop at the half hour sometimes.
Frank Kovacs.
Yep, I'm here.
Still from still from last time.
Quick thing.
So I actually come from the engineering side of things, specifically in the data engineering group.
And my question was split up.
My question specifically was because we have so many, I don't want to use the term five coding, but for lack of a better term, five coding tools and the ability to upskill very quickly.
Do you think that the boundaries within some organizations will continue to be so rigid between the engineering groups, the data science groups, the infra groups?
Or do you think we're moving towards more of a everyone does a bit of everything model?
Yeah, this is this is an interesting question.
I think I don't know.
I think that's that's where I am.
You know, I try to I try to make sure I'm willing to say I don't know when I don't know.
And this is one where I'm not sure because because, you know, you see, you know, so let me let me think of an example.
So I see some people, you know, in the organization who aren't necessarily within our team really taking some initiative.
Right. Especially with the ability, the availability of, you know, AI assisted coding and people's just ability to take take initiative on that.
And the thing I see, though, is if they really want to do this as a huge part of their job and they're in, say, philanthropy or something.
They're going to have a better career path if they would like, for example, move into our team, because our team is like you can come as a data scientist and you can grow your career, you know, in a lot of different directions.
Whereas when I see more engineering or data science isolated, the question I always wonder is, is where is how does the career growth happen there?
If they want to stay focused on on engineering and development, because I think either, you know, you move into a leadership position in finance or philanthropy or whatever division of the organization.
And you're not going to be spending much time thinking about engineering or data science in the way you would in IT.
So I think that the tools have made it easier, but I wonder a little bit about the career path.
All right, everybody, we are two minutes from the top of the hour, so I think that we will have to wrap it up and say goodbye to Matt and say thank you so much, Matt, for this amazing conversation.
I hope that you had a good time.
Yeah, this was this was fun. Thank you.
Thank you for organizing and and moderating.
And yeah, this is a lot of fun.
And yeah, anyone in here, feel free to reach out to me on LinkedIn or whatever method makes sense, because, yeah, I'd love to get to know more people who are interested in similar things or encountering similar challenges in this industry.
So thank you.
Let's do it. Thank you, everybody, for hanging out.
If you'd like to save the chat, there's three dots in the top of the chat box that you can click and save the chat, but also join the Hangout channel on our Discord server.
So POS.IT slash Discord.
The link is only open for the next few hours.
So if you're watching this on Discord later, that link's probably not working, but don't worry about it.
Join us and have a really, really good time following up.
I have tagged some people in our Data Science Hangout channel that I know we're all having a similar conversation.
We can get there and follow up.
Thank you so much for joining us, everybody.
And we will love to see you next week.
Next week, we have Isabel Zimmerman and Davis Vaughn, two software engineers from POS.IT that work on all kinds of fun things.
Isabel works on Positron.
Davis does a lot of work with, like, Tidyverse stuff as well.
That's super, super fun to ask questions about.
So we look forward to seeing you there.
Thank you so much, Matt.
Thank you, Libby.
I saw there was a quick question about if these recordings are made available, and I just want to make sure everybody knows that all the Hangouts go up to the POS.IT YouTube channel.
There's a Data Science Hangout playlist, but also on our website on the Data Science Hangout site, too.
So you can check it out there.
That's right.
Thank you so much.
Thanks, everybody.
See you next week.
Thank you.